---
title: Hashing
longtitle: Introduction to Cryptography
date: 2025-10-08
tags:
- cryptography
layout: post
---

# Hashing
Broadly speaking, hashing itself is the act of acquiring a _hash_ value of a digital file. It is the specific process of using a hash function to transform data of any size into fixed-size string. 

## What is it?

A hash is a digital fingerprint. Just like a fingerprint, a hash uniquely identifies a file. A hash is derived through a use of a hash function.

## hash functions

They are mathematical algorightms that convert data of any size into a fixed-sized string of characters known as *hash value*, *hash code*, or *digest*

The common algorithms are: 

- MD5
- SHA-1
- *SHA-256*

All these algorithms a fixed-sized string with very specific properties.


## Strict Definition

A one-way mathematical process that takes any input data (a file, a password, a message) and produces a fixed-size, unique string of characters.

---

# Properties of a Hash

## 1. Deterministic

The same input always produces the same hash.

#### Use-Case

This ensures reproducibility of evidence.

## 2. Pre-Image Resistance

Given a hash, it is impossible to find the original data.

#### Use-Case

This is crucial for protecting password in databases.

## 3. Second Pre-Image Resistance

It is impossible to find a different input that matches a given hash. 

#### Use-Case

This prevents document forgery.

## 4. Collision Resistance 

It is impossible to find two different inputs that product the same hash. 

#### Use-Case

This guarantees the uniqueness of digital evidence fingerprints.

## 5. Avalanche Effect 

A tiny change in the input results in a massive, unpredictable change in the output.

#### Use-Case

This makes hashes extremely sensitive to data alteration.

---

# Practical Command-line

> ##### TIP
>
> It might be harder at first but practising these commands and using it daily 
> will eventually make you more efficient and versatile. 
{: .block-tip }

## Shell/Terminal

### Windows Powershell

**Command**
```shell
Get-FileHash FullFilePath -Algorithm SHA256
```

**Output**
```
Algorithm       Hash                                                                   Path
---------       ----                                                                   ----
SHA256          068D5DCA983B22ED36A00DEA7D42E58B646F0AC495885892F5746357F39A0470       C:\Users\username\filename.ext
```

### Linux/MacOS/Termux

**Command**
```shell
sha256sum FullFilePath
```
**Output**
```
068d5dca983b22ed36a00dea7d42e58b646f0ac495885892f5746357f39a0470 */c/Users/username/filename.ext
```

---

## Comparing Hashes

In the previous section, you will notice the output is direct to the console or terminal display. In this section, note how the output
is redirected or how sections of it are extracted from the output depending on the shell that you are using.

### Windows Powershell


```shell
Compare-Object (Get-FileHash FullFilePath -Algorithm SHA256).Hash 068D5DCA983B22ED36A00DEA7D42E58B646F0AC495885892F5746357F39A0470
```

> ##### Powershell Info
>
> `Compare-Object` will not output anything if the compared values are equal. 
>
{: .block-info}

> ##### TIP
>
> Windows Powershell like their hash values in uppercase, while linux hash values are generated in lowercase.
>
{: .block-tip}

### Linux/MacOS/Termux

In the example command below, we are redirecting the output of the command to a file using the `>` operator.

```shell
sha256sum FullFile1Path | cut -d' ' -f 1 > file1_hash.sha256
sha256sum FullFile2Path | cut -d' ' -f 1 > file2_hash.sha256
cmp file1_hash.sha256 file2_hash.sha256
```

> ##### Command-line Info 
>
> The `|` operator forwards an output of a command to the command immediately after it.
>
> The `cut` command in linux or unix based system allows us to remove sections from a line.
> The `-d` specifies a delimiter to be used to split or cut sections, while the `-f` specifies which field we want to be returned.
>
{: .block-info}


> ##### Danger
>
> In output redirection, the `>` operator will overwrite all contents of the file, if the file already exists.
>
{: .block-danger}
---

# Activities 

The activities listed here are designed to provide you a practical understanding of the five properties of a good hash algorithm. And the value that it provides.

## Activity 1

1. In Windows Powershell, create the directory `cert-ph` in `C:\`.
2. Inside that directory, create a `name.txt` file and write down your lastname. There should be no other characters inside the file other than your last name.
3. Get the md5 hash of that file and save it as `name.md5`  
4. Get the sha1 hash of that file and save it as `name.sha1`  
5. Get the sha256 hash of that file and save it as `name.sha256` 
6. Individually verify all the hashes against the file `name.txt` 

---



## Activity 2

1. Rename `name.txt` to `pangalan.txt`
2. Get the hash of the file `pangalan.txt` 
3. Edit `pangalan.txt`, and introduce a `.` anywhere inside the file.
4. Individually verify all the hashes against the file `name.txt` 

---



## Activity 3

1. Download a small image online and save it under `C:\cert-ph`
    Save it with the following name: `sample-image-00`
2. Get the hash value of `sample-image-00`.
3. Make a copy of that file on the same directory. 
    Save it as `sample-image-01`
4. Get the hash value of `sample-image-01`.
5. Make a copy of `sample-image-01` on the same directory, 
    Save it as `sample-image-02`, 
    and use file properties to add some metadata into the image. 
6. Get the hash value of `sample-image-02` with a modified metadata file.
7. Make a copy of `sample-image-02` on the same directory, 
    Save it as `sample-image-03`, 
    and simply remove that metadata that you added into the image.
8. Get the hash value of `sample-image-03` with a modified metadata file.

---


## Synthesis

- Does renaming a file change the hash? 
- What does it take to change the hash of a data?
- Can you tell for sure that the file has not been modified? If yes, how and why?


---

# Hash Table

## Definition

A hash table is a data structure that allows for extremely fast lookups by 
using a hash function to map a key to a specific location, or bucket, within an
array.



| key                   | value               |
|-----------------------|---------------------|
|                       |                     |
|-----------------------|---------------------|
|                       |                     |
|-----------------------|---------------------|
| 6e7931a650d82fa4f83332bebe8ad018 | 21 |
|-----------------------|---------------------|
|                       |                     |
|-----------------------|---------------------|
| 183ee5c38f5718616e4d909d5298b395 | 20 |
|-----------------------|---------------------|




